This is a LibriVox recording.
All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information, see LibriVox.blogsum.com.
Today's reading by Hugh Maguire.
Frankenstein by Mary Shelley.
Chapter 24.
My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost.
I was hurried away by fury.
Revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure.
It molded my feelings and allowed me to be calculating and calm.
At periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been my portion.
My first resolution was to quit Geneva forever.
My country, which when I was happy and beloved was dear to me, now in my adversity became hateful.
I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.
And now my wanderings began, which are to cease but with life.
I have traveled a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travelers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet.
How I have lived I hardly know.
How many times I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death.
But revenge kept me alive.
I dare not die and leave my adversary in being.
When I quitted Geneva, my first labor was to gain some clue by which I might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy.
But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue.
As night approached, I found myself at the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed.
I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves.
Everything was silent, except the leaves of the trees which were gently agitated by the wind.
The night was nearly dark, and the scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer.
The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast shadow, which was felt but not seen around the head of the mourner.
The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to rage and despair.
They were dead, and I lived.
Their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence.
I knelt on the grass and kissed the earth, and with quivering lips exclaimed,
By the sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me,
By the deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear, and by thee, O night,
And the spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the demon who caused this misery,
Until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict, for this purpose I will preserve my life.
To execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth,
Which otherwise should vanish from my eyes forever, and I call on you, spirits of the dead,
And on you wandering ministers of vengeance to aid and conduct me in my work.
Let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony.
Let him feel the despair that now torments me.
I had begun my adjuration with solemnity, and an awe which almost assured me
That the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion.
But the furies possessed me, as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
I was answered through the stillness of the night by a loud and fiendish laugh.
It rang on my ears long and heavily. The mountains re-echoed it,
And I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by frenzy,
And have destroyed my miserable existence, but that my vow was heard,
And that I was reserved for vengeance.
The laughter died away.
When a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear,
Addressed me in an audible whisper.
I am satisfied, miserable wretch. You have determined to live, and I am satisfied.
I darted towards a spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp.
Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose, and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape,
As he fled with more than mortal speed.
I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task.
Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhône, but vainly.
The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance I saw the fiend enter by night,
And hide himself in a vessel band bound for the Black Sea.
I took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how.
Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I have ever followed in his track.
Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, inform me of his path.
Sometimes he himself, who feared that if I lost all trace of him, I should despair and die, left some mark to guide me.
The snows descended on my head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white plain.
To you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown,
How can you understand what I have felt and still feel?
Cold, want, and fatigue, were the least pains of which I was destined to endure.
I was cursed by some devil, and carried about with me my eternal hell.
Yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my step, and when I most murmured,
Would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties.
Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sunk under the exhaustion,
A repast was prepared for me in the desert, that restored and inspirited me.
The fair was indeed coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate,
But I will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had invoked to aid me.
Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I was parched by thirst,
A slight cloud would bedim the sky, and shed a few drops that revived me and vanished.
I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers, but the demon generally avoided these,
As it was here that the population of the country chiefly collected.
In other places human beings were seldom seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path.
I had money with me, and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it,
While I brought with me some food that I had killed, which after taking small part,
I always presented to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.
My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me,
And it was during sleep alone that I could taste joy. Oh, blessed sleep!
Often, when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture.
The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness,
That I might retain strength to fulfill my pilgrimage.
Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships.
During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night,
For in sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved country.
Again I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice,
And beheld Clerval, enjoying health and youth.
Often, when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should come,
And that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends.
What agonizing fondness did I feel for them? How did I cling to their fears, to their...
What agonizing fondness did I feel for them? How did I cling to their dream forms,
As sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that they still lived?
At such moments, vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart,
And I pursued my path towards the destruction of the demon,
More as a task enjoined by heaven,
As the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious,
Than as the ardent desire of my soul.
What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know.
Sometimes, indeed, he left marks in writing on the bark of the trees,
Or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury.
My reign is not yet over.
These words were legible in one of these inscriptions.
You live, and my power is complete. Follow me.
I seek the everlasting ices of the north,
Where you will feel the misery of cold and frost to which I am impassive.
You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare.
Eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy.
We have yet to wrestle for our lives,
But many hard and miserable hours must you endure,
Until that period shall arrive.
Scoffing devil, again do I vow vengeance,
Again do I devote thee, miserable fiend to torture and death.
Never will I give up my search until he or I perish,
And then with what ecstasy shall I join my Elizabeth
And my departed friends who even now prepare for me
The reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage.
As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened,
And the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support.
The peasants were shut up in their hovels,
And only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals
Whom starvation had forced from their hiding places to seek for prey.
The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured,
And thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.
The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labors.
One inscription that he left was in these words,
Prepare, your toil is only begin.
Wrap yourself in furs, and provide food, for we shall soon enter
Upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.
My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words.
I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support me,
I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
Until the ocean appeared at a distance, and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon.
Oh, how unlike it was to the blue seasons of the south!
Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness.
The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia,
And hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils.
I did not weep, but I knelt down, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirits for conducting me
In safety to the place where I hoped, not withstanding my adversary's jibe,
To meet and grapple with him.
Some weeks before this period I had procured a sled and dogs,
And thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed.
I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that as before
I had daily lost ground in the pursuit I now gained on him,
So much so that when I first saw the ocean he was but one day's journey in advance,
And I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach.
With new courage therefore I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore.
I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information.
A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
Putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance.
He had carried off their store of winter food and, placing it in a sledge, to draw,
Which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs.
He had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers,
Had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land,
And they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the ice frozen by the eternal frosts.
On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair.
He had escaped me, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey
Across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure,
And which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive.
Yet at the idea that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned,
And, like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round,
And instigated me to toil in revenge, I prepared for my journey.
I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the frozen ocean,
And purchasing a plentiful stock of presisions.
I departed from land.
I cannot guess how many days have passed since then,
But I have endured misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution,
Burning within my heart, could have enabled me to support.
Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage,
And I often heard the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction.
But again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.
By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should guess that I had passed three weeks in this journey,
And the continual protraction of hope returning back upon the heart,
Often wrung bitter drops of despondency and grief from my eyes.
Despair had indeed almost secured her prey,
And I should soon have sunk beneath this misery.
Once after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain,
And one, sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish,
When suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain.
I strained my sight to discover what it could be,
And uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge,
And the distorted proportions of a well-known form within.
Oh, with what burning gush did hope revisit my heart,
Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away,
That they might not intercept the view I had of the demon.
But still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops,
Until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud.
But this was not the time for delay.
I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion,
Gave them a plentiful portion of food,
And after an hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary,
And yet, which was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route.
The sledge was still visible, nor did I again lose sight of it,
Except at the moment when, for a short time,
Some ice rock concealed it with its intervening crags.
I indeed perceptibly gained on it,
And when, after nearly two days' journey,
I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant,
My heart bounded within me.
But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe,
My hopes were suddenly extinguished,
And I lost all trace of him more utterly than I had ever done before.
A ground sea was heard, the thunder of its progress
As the waters rolled and swelled beneath me,
Became every moment more ominous and terrific.
I pressed on, but in vain.
The wind rose and the sea roared,
And, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake,
It split and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound.
The work was soon finished.
In a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy,
And I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice
That was continually lessening,
And thus preparing for me a hideous death.
In this manner many an appalling hours passed.
Several of my dogs died,
And I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress
When I saw your vessel riding at anchor,
And holding forth to me hopes of succor and life.
I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north
And was astounded at the sight.
I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars,
And by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue,
To move my ice raft in the direction of your ship.
I had determined, if you were going southward,
Still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas
Rather than abandon my purpose.
I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat
With which I could pursue my enemy,
But your direction was northward.
You took me on board when my vigor was exhausted,
And I should soon have sunk under my multiple-eyed hardships
Into a death which I still dread,
For my task is unfulfilled.
Oh, when will my guiding spirit in conducting me to the demon
Allow me the rest I so much desire,
Or must I die, and he yet live?
If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape,
That you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death.
And do I dare to ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage
To endure the hardships that I have undergone?
No, I am not so selfish.
Yet when I am dead, if he should appear,
If the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you,
Swear that he shall not live,
Swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes,
And survive to add to the list of his dark crimes.
He is eloquent and persuasive,
And once his words had even power over my heart,
But trust him not, his soul is as hellish as his form,
Full of treachery and fiendlike malice.
Hear him not.
Call on him the mains of William, Justine,
Clairvaux, Elizabeth, my father and the wretched Victor,
And thrust your sword into his heart.
I will hover near and direct the steel aright.
Walton, in continuation.
August 26th, 17 something.
You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret.
And do you not feel your blood congeal with horror,
Like that which even now curdles mine?
Sometimes, seized with sudden agony,
He could not continue his tale.
At others his voice broken, yet piercing,
Uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish.
His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation,
Now subdued to downcast sorrow,
And quenched in infinite wretchedness.
Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones,
And related the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice,
Suppressing every mark of agitation.
Then, like a volcano bursting forth,
His face would suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage,
As he shrieked out,
Impreciations on his persecutor.
His tale is connected,
And told with an appearance of the simplest truth.
Yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Saffy,
Which he showed me,
And the apparition of the monster seen from our ship,
Brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative
Than his assertiveness,
However earnest and connected.
Such a monster has, then, real existence.
I cannot doubt it.
Yet I am lost in surprise and admiration.
Sometimes I endeavored to gain from Frankenstein
The particulars of his creature's formation,
But on this point he was impenetrable.
Are you mad, my friend, said he,
Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you?
Would you also create for yourself and the world a demonical enemy?
Peace, peace!
Learn my miseries and do not seek to increase your own.
Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history.
He asked to see them,
And then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
But principally in giving me the life
And spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy.
Since you have preserved my narration, said he,
I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.
Thus has a week passed away
While I have listened to the strangest tale
That ever imagination formed.
My thoughts and every feeling of my soul
Have been drunk up by the interest of my guest,
Which this tale and his own elevated and gentle manners have created.
I wish to soothe him, yet I can counsel one
So indefinitely miserable,
So destitute of every hope and consolation.
Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history.
He asked to see them,
And then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
But principally in giving me the life
And spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy.
Since you have preserved my narration, said he,
I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.
Thus has a week passed away
While I have listened to the strangest tale
That ever imagination formed.
My thoughts and every feeling of my soul
Have been drunk up by the interest of my guest,
Which this tale and his own elevated gentle manners have created.
I wish to soothe him, yet I can counsel one
So infinitely miserable,
So destitute of every hope and consolation to live.
Oh no, the only joy that he can now know
Will be when he composes his shattered spirit
To peace and death.
Yet he enjoys one comfort,
The offspring of solitude and delirium.
He believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his friends
And derives from that communion consolation for his miseries
Or excitements to his vengeance,
That they are not the creations of his fancy,
But the beings themselves who visit from the regions of a remote world.
This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries
That render them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.
Our conversations are not always confined
To his own history and misfortunes.
On every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge
And a quick and piercing apprehension.
His eloquence is forcible and touching,
Nor can I hear him when he relates a pathetic incident
Or endeavors to move the passions of pity or love without tears.
What a glorious creature must he have been in the days of his prosperity
When he is thus noble and godlike in ruin.
He seems to feel his own worth in the greatness of his fall.
When younger, said he, I believe myself destined for some great enterprise.
My feelings are profound,
But I possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements.
This sentiment of worth, of my nature, supported me
When others would have been oppressed.
For I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief
Those talents that might be useful to my fellow creatures.
When I reflected on the work I had completed
No less than one, no lesser one than the creation of a sensitive and rational animal.
I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors.
But this thought, which supported me in my commencement of my career,
Now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust.
All my speculations and hopes are as nothing and,
Like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence,
I am chained to an eternal hell.
My imagination was vivid,
Yet my powers of analysis and application were intense.
By the union of these qualities I conceived the idea
And executed the creation of a man.
Even now I cannot recollect, without passion,
My reveries while the work was incomplete.
I trod heaven in my thoughts,
Now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of their effects.
From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and lofty ambition.
But how I am sunk.
Oh, my friend, if you had known me as I once was,
You would not recognize me in this state of degradation.
Despondency rarely visited my heart.
A high destiny seemed to bear me on until I fell,
Never, never again to rise.
Must I then lose this admirable being?
I have longed for a friend.
I have sought one who would sympathize with and love me.
Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one.
But I have fear I have gamed him
Only to know his value and lose him.
I would reconcile him to life.
But he repulses the idea.
I thank you, Walton, he said,
For your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch.
But when you speak of new tides and fresh affections,
Think you that any can replace those who are gone.
Can any man be to me as Clairvaux was,
Or any woman another Elizabeth?
Even where the affections are not strongly moved
By any superior excellence,
The companions of our childhood always possess
A certain power over our minds,
Which hardly any later friend can obtain.
They know our infinite dispositions,
Which, however they may be afterwards modified,
Are never eradicated.
They can judge of our actions
With more certain conclusions
As to the integrity of our motives.
A sister or a brother can never,
Unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
Suspect the other of fraud or false dealings,
When another friend, however strongly he may be attached,
May, in spite of himself,
Be contemplated with suspicion.
But I enjoyed friends dear not only
Through habit and association,
But from their own merits.
And wherever I am, the soothing voice of my Elizabeth
And the conversations of Clairvaux
Will ever be whispered in my ear.
They are dead,
But one feeling in such a solitude
Can persuade me to preserve my life.
If I were engaged in any high undertaking
Or design,
Fraught with extensive utility
To my fellow creatures,
Then I could live to fulfill it,
But such is not my destiny.
I must pursue and destroy the being
To whom I have gave existence.
Then my lot on earth will be fulfilled,
And I may die.
September 2nd.
My beloved sister,
I write to you encompassed by peril
And ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again
My dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it.
I am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape
And threaten every moment to crush my vessel.
The brave fellows who I have persuaded to be
My companions look towards me for aid,
But I have none to bestow.
There is something terribly appalling in our situation,
Yet my courage and hopes do not desert me.
Yet it is terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men
Are endangered through me.
If we are lost, my mad, mad schemes are the cause.
And what, Margaret,
Will be the state of your mind?
You will not hear of my destruction,
And you will anxiously await my return.
Years will pass and you will have visiting of despair
And yet be tortured by hope.
Oh, my beloved sister, the sickening failing
Of your heartfelt expectations is in prospect
More terrible to me than my own death,
But you have a husband and lovely children.
You may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so.
My unfortunate guest regards me
With a tenderest compassion.
He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life
Were a possession which he valued.
He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened
To other navigators who have attempted this sea.
And in spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful
Auguries.
Even the sailors feel the power of his eloquence.
When he speaks, they no longer despair.
He rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice,
They believe these vast mountains of ice
Are molehills which will vanish before the resolutions
Of man.
These feelings are transitory.
Each day of expectation delayed fills them with fear.
And I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair.
September 5th.
A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest
That although it is highly probable that these papers
May never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it.
We are still surrounded by mountains of ice,
Still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict.
The cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate
Comrades have already found a grave amidst this
Scene of desolation.
Frankenstein has daily declined in health.
A feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes.
But he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any
Exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent
Lifelessness.
I mentioned in my last letter the fears
I entertained of a mutiny.
This morning as I sat, watching the wan countenance
Of my friend, his eyes half closed and his limbs
Hanging listlessly, I was roused by half a dozen
Of the sailors who demanded admission into the cabin.
They entered, and their leader addressed me.
He told me that he and his companions had been chosen
By the other sailors to come in deputation to me,
To make a requisition, which injustice I could not
Refuse.
We were immured in ice, and should probably never
Escape, but they feared that if, as was possible,
The ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened,
I should be rash enough to continue my voyage,
And lead them into fresh dangers, after which they
Might happily have surmounted this.
They insisted, therefore, that I should engage with
A solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed,
I would instantly direct my course southward.
Their speech troubled me.
I had not despaired, nor had I yet conceived
The idea of returning if set free.
Yet I could injustice, yet could I injustice,
Or even impossibility, refuse this demand.
I hesitated before I answered,
When Frankenstein, who had at first been silent
And indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend,
Now roused himself.
His eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary
Vigor.
Turning towards the men, he said, What do you mean?
What do you demand of your captain?
Are you then so easily turned from your design?
Did you not call this a glorious expedition?
And wherefore was it glorious?
Not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea,
But because it was full of dangers and terror,
Because at every new incident,
Your fortitude was to be called forth,
And your courage exhibited,
Because danger and death surrounded it,
And these you were to brave and overcome.
For this it was glorious, and for this it was
An honorable undertaking.
You were hereafter to be hailed
As the benefactors of your species,
Your names adored as belonging to the brave men
Who encountered death for honor,
And the benefit of mankind.
And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger,
Or, if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial
Of your courage, you shrink away,
And are content to be handed down as men
Who had not strength enough to endure cold imperil.
And so poor souls were chilly
And returned to their warm firesides.
Why, that requires not this preparation.
Ye need not have come thus far,
And dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat,
Merely to prove yourself cowards.
Oh, be men, or be more than men.
Be steady to your purposes, and firm as a rock.
This ice is not made of such stuff
As your hearts may be.
It is mutable and cannot withstand you.
If you say that it shall not, do not return to your families
With the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows.
Return as heroes who have fought and conquered,
And who know not what it is to turn back,
Turn their backs on the foe.
He spoke this with a voice
So modulated to the different feelings
Expressed in his speech, with an eye
So full of lofty design and heroism,
That can you wonder that these men were moved?
They looked at one another and were unable to reply.
I spoke.
I told them to retire and consider of what had been said,
That I would not lead them farther north
If they strenuously desired the contrary,
But that I hoped that, with reflection,
Their courage would return.
They retired, and I turned towards my friend,
But he was sunk in languor,
And almost deprived of life.
How all this will terminate, I know not.
But I had rather die than return shamefully,
My purpose unfulfilled.
Yet I fear such will be my fate.
The men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honor,
Can never willingly continue to endure
Their present hardship.
September 7th. The die is cast.
I have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision.
I come back ignorant and disappointed.
It requires more philosophy than I possess
To bear this injustice with patience.
September 12th.
It is past.
I am returning to England.
I have lost my hopes of utility and glory.
I have lost my friend.
But I will endeavor to detail these bitter circumstances to you,
My dear sister, and while I am wafted towards England
And towards you, I will not despond.
September 9th. The ice began to move,
And roarings like thunder were heard at a distance,
As the island split and cracked
In every direction.
We were in the most imminent peril,
But as we could only remain passive,
My chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest,
Whose illness increased in such a degree
That he was entirely confined to his bed.
The ice cracked behind us and was driven
With force towards the north.
A breeze sprung from the west,
And on the 11th the passage towards the south
Became perfectly free.
When the sailors saw this, and that their return to the native country
Was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy
Broke from them, loud and long continued.
Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked
The cause of the tumult.
They shout, I said, because they will soon
Return to England.
Do you then really return?
Alas, yes, I cannot withstand their demands.
I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger.
I must return.
Do so, if you will, but I will not.
You may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me
By heaven, and I dare not.
I am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance
Will endow me with sufficient strength.
Saying this, he endeavored to spring from the bed,
But the exertion was too great for him.
He fell back and fainted.
It was not long before he was restored,
And I often thought that life was entirely extinct.
At length he opened his eyes,
He breathed with difficulty, and was unable to speak.
The surgeon gave him a composing draft,
And ordered us to leave him undisturbed.
In the meantime, he told me that my friend
Had certainly not many hours to live.
His sentence was pronounced,
And I could only grieve and be patient.
I sat by his bed, watching him.
His eyes were closed, and I thought he slept.
But presently he called to me in a feeble voice,
And bidding me come near, said,
Alas, the strength I relied on is gone.
I feel that I soon shall die,
And he, my enemy and persecutor,
May still be in being.
Think not, Walton, that in the last moments
Of my existence I feel that burned hatred
And ardent desire of revenge I once expressed,
But I feel myself justified in desiring
The death of my adversary.
During these last days I have been occupied
In examining my past conduct,
Nor do I find it blamable.
In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created
A rational creature and was bound towards him
To assure, as far as was in my power,
His happiness and well-being.
This was my duty, but there was another
Still paramount to that.
My duties towards the beings of my own species
Had greater claims to my attention,
Because they included a greater proportion
Of happiness or misery.
Urged by this view, I refused,
And did right in refusing to create a companion
For the first creature.
He showed unparalleled malignity
And selfishness in evil.
He destroyed my friends.
He devoted to destruction
Beings who possessed exquisite sensations,
Happiness and wisdom.
Nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance may end,
Miserable himself, that he may render no other wretched.
He ought to die.
The task of this destruction was mine, but I have failed.
When actuated by selfish and vicious motives,
I asked you to undertake
My unfinished work,
And I renew this request now,
When I am only induced by reason and virtue.
Yet I cannot ask you to renounce
Your country and friends to fulfill this task.
And now that you are returning to England,
You will have little chance of meeting with him,
But the consideration of these points
And the well-balancing of what you may esteem
Your duties, I leave to you.
My judgment and ideas are already disturbed
By the near approach of death.
I dare not ask you to do what I think right,
For I may still be misled by passion.
That he should live to be an instrument of mischief
Disturbs me in other respects this hour,
When I momentarily expect my release
Is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years.
The forms of the beloved dead
Flip before me, and I hasten to their arms.
Farewell, Walton.
Seek happiness in the tranquility,
And avoid ambition, even if it be only
The apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself
In science and discoveries.
Yet why do I say this?
I have myself been blasted in these hopes.
Yet another may succeed.
His voice became faint as he spoke,
And at length, exhausted by his effort,
He sunk into silence.
About half an hour afterwards,
He attempted again to speak, but was unable.
He pressed my hand feebly,
And his eyes closed forever,
While the irradiation of a gentle smile
Passed away from his lips.
Margaret, what comment can I make
On the untimely extinction of this glorious spirit?
What can I say that will enable you
To understand the depth of my sorrow?
All that I should express
Would be inadequate and feeble.
My tears flow.
My mind is overshadowed by a cold,
A cloud of disappointment.
But I journey towards England,
And I may there find consolation.
I am interrupted. What do these sounds pretend?
It is midnight, the breeze blows fairly,
And the watch on deck scarcely stir.
Again there is a sound as of a human voice,
But horser. It comes from the cabin
Where the remains of Frankenstein still lie.
I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister.
Great God, what a scene has just taken place!
I am yet dizzy with remembrance of it.
I hardly know whether I shall have the power
To detail it, yet the tale which I have recorded
Would be incomplete without this final
And wonderful catastrophe. I enter the cabin
Where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend.
Over him hung a form
Which I cannot find words to describe,
Gigantic in stature, yet uncouth
And distorted in its proportions.
As he hung over the coffin his face was concealed
By long locks of ragged hair, but one vast hand
Was extended in colour and apparent texture
Like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound
Of my approach he ceased to utter exclamations
Of grief and horror and sprung towards the window.
Never before did I behold a vision
So horrible as his face, of such loathsome
Yet appalling hideousness.
I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured
To recollect what were my duties with regard
To this destroyer. I called on him to stay.
He paused, looking on me with wonder
And again turning towards the lifeless form
Of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence
And every feature and gesture seemed instigated
By the wildest rage of some uncontrollable
Passion.
That is also my victim, he exclaimed.
In his murder my crimes
Are consummated. The miserable series
Of my being is wound to its close.
That is also my victim,
He exclaimed. In his murder
My crimes are consummated.
The miserable series of my being
Is wound to its close.
O Frankenstein,
Generous and self-devoted being,
What does it avail
That I now ask thee to pardon me?
I, who irretrievably
Destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovest,
Alas, he is cold.
He cannot answer me.
His voice seemed suffocated
And my first impulses, which had suggested
To me the duty of obeying the dying request
Of my friend in destroying his enemy
Were now suspended by a mixture
Of curiosity and compassion.
I approached this tremendous being.
I dared not again raise my eyes to his face.
There was something so scarring and unearthly
In its ugliness.
I attempted to speak, but the words
Died away on my lips. The monster continued
To utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches.
At length I gathered resolution
To address him in a pause of the tempest
Of his passion.
Your repentance, I said, is now superfluous.
If you had listened to the voice of conscience
And heeded the strings of remorse
Before you had urged your diabolical vengeance
To this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.
And do you dream?
Said the demon.
Do you think that I was then dead to agony and remorse?
He, he continued pointing to the corpse,
He suffered not in the consummation of the deed.
Oh, not the ten thousandth portion
Of the anguish that was mine during the lingering
Detail of its execution.
A frightful selfishness hurried me on
While my heart was poisoned with remorse.
Think you that the groans
Of Clairvaux were music to my ears?
My heart was fashioned
To be susceptible of love
And sympathy, and when wretched
By the misery of vice and hatred
It did not endure the violence of the charred change
Without torture such as you cannot even imagine.
After the murder of Clairvaux
While I returned to Switzerland heartbroken and overcome,
I pitied Frankenstein, my pity amounted to horror.
I abhorred myself.
But when I discovered that he, the author at once
Of my existence and of its unspeakable torments
Dared to hope for happiness,
That while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
He sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions
From the indulgence of which I was forever barred,
Then impotent envy and bitter indignation
Filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance.
I recollected my threat
And resolved that it should be accomplished.
I knew that I was preparing myself
For a deadly torture, but I was the slave
Not the master of an impulse
Which I detested, yet I could not disobey.
Yes, when she died,
Nay, then I was not miserable.
I had cast off all feelings, subdued all anguish
To riot in the excess of my despair.
Evil, thencefore, became my good.
Urged thus far, I had no choice
But to adapt my nature to an element
Which I had willingly chosen.
The completion of my demonical design
Became an insatiable passion, and now it has ended.
There is my last victim.
I was at first touched by the expression of his misery,
Yet when I called to mind what Frankenstein
Had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion,
And when I again cast my eyes
On the lifeless form of my friend,
Indignation was rekindled within me.
Wretch, I said, it is well that you come here
To whine over the desolation that you have made.
You throw a torch into a pile of buildings,
And when they are consumed you sit among the ruins
And lament the fall, hypocritical fiend.
If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object.
Again would he become the prey
Of your accursed vengeance.
It is not pity that you feel.
You lament only because the victim of your malignity
Is withdrawn from your power.
Oh, it is not thus,
Not thus interrupted the being.
Yet such must be the impression conveyed to you
By what appears to be the purport of my actions.
Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
No sympathy may I ever find.
When I first sought it, it was the love of virtue,
The feelings of happiness and affection,
With which my whole being overflowed
That I wished to be participated.
But now that virtue has become to me a shadow,
And that happiness and affection are turned
Into bitter and loathing despair,
In what should I seek for sympathy?
I am content to suffer alone,
While my suffering shall endure.
When I die, I am well satisfied
That abhorrence and opprobrium
Should load my memory.
Once my fancy was soothed
With dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment.
Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings who,
Pardoning my outward form, would love me
For the excellent qualities
Which I was capable of unfolding.
I was nourished with high thoughts of honor and devotion.
But now crime has degraded me
Beneath the meanest animal.
No guilt, no mischief,
No malignity, no misery
Can be found comparable to mine.
When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins,
I cannot believe that I am the same creature
Whose thoughts were once filled with sublime
And transcendent visions of the beauty
And the majesty of goodness.
But it is even so.
The fallen angel becomes a malignant devil.
Yet even that enemy of God and man
Had friends and associates in his desolation.
I am alone.
You who call Frankenstein your friend
Seem to have a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes.
But in the detail which he gave you
Of them he could not sum up the hours
And months of misery which I endured
Wasting in impotent passions.
For while I destroyed his hopes
I did not satisfy my own desires.
They were forever ardent and craving.
Still I desired love
And fellowship.
And I was still spurned.
Was there no injustice in this?
Am I to be thought the only criminal
When all humankind simmed against me?
Why do you not hate Felix
Who drove his friend from the door with contumely?
Why do you not execrate
The rustic who sought to destroy
The savior of his child?
Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings.
I, the miserable and the abandoned
Am an abortion to be spurned at,
Kicked and trampled on.
Even now my blood boils
At the recollection of this injustice.
But it is true that I am a wretch.
I have murdered the lovely and the helpless.
I have strangled the innocent as they slept
And grasped to death his throat
Who never injured me or any other living thing.
I have devoted my creator
The select specimen of all that is worthy of love
And admiration among men to misery.
I have pursued him
Even to that irredeemable ruin.
There he lies, white and cold in death.
You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal
That with which I regard myself.
I look on the hands which executed the deed
I think of the heart
In which the imagination of it was conceived
And long for the moment when these hands will meet my eyes
When that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.
Fear not that I shall be instrument
Of future mischief.
My work is nearly complete.
Neither yours nor any man's death
Is needed to consummate the series of my being
And accomplish that which must be done.
But it requires my own.
Do not think that I shall be slow
To perform this sacrifice.
I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft
Which brought me thither
And shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe.
I shall collect my funeral pile
And consume to ashes this miserable frame
That it remains.
Its remains may afford no light to any curious
And unhallowed wretch who would create
Such another as I have been.
I shall die. I shall no longer feel the agonies
Which now consume me
Or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied yet unquenched.
He is dead
Who called me into being
And when I shall be no more
The very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish.
I shall no longer see the sun or stars
Or feel the winds play on my cheeks.
Light, feeling and sense will pass away
And in this condition
Must I find my happiness.
Some years ago
When the images
Which this world affords first opened upon me
When I felt the cheering warmth of summer
And heard the rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds
And these were all to me
I should have wept to die.
Now it is my only consolation
Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse
Where can I find rest but in death?
Farewell
I leave you and in the last of the humankind
Whom these eyes
Will ever behold.
Farewell, Frankenstein
If thou were yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me
It would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction
But it was not so
Thou didst not seek my extinction
That I might not cause greater wretchedness
And if yet in some mode unknown to me thou hadst not ceased
To think and feel thou wouldst not desire against me
A vengeance greater than that which I feel
Blasted as thou wert
My agony was still superior to thine
For the bitter sting of remorse
Will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death
Shall I close them forever
But soon, he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm
I shall die
And what I now feel
Be no longer felt
Soon these burning miseries will be extinct
I shall ascend my funeral pile
Triumphantly
And exult in the agony of the torturing flames
The light of that conflagration
Will fade away
My ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds
My spirit will sleep in peace
Or if it thinks
It will not surely think thus
Farewell
He sprung from the cabin window
As he said this, upon the ice raft
Which lay close to the vessel
He was soon borne away by the waves
And lost in darkness and distance
The end
Thanks for watching